Day 1 DevOps Summary – MUHAMMAD AHMAD

Learning Goals:
- Improve English for interviews
- Master public speaking skills
- Build confidence in professional communication

Part 1: DevOps Vocabulary Practice (10 Key Terms)
1. CI/CD – Continuous Integration / Continuous Deployment
   Example: "We use CI/CD pipelines to automate testing and deployment."
2. Version Control – System to track changes in code
   Example: "Git helps us manage version control efficiently."
3. Repository – A storage location for code
   Example: "I pushed the latest changes to the GitHub repository."
4. Pipeline – A set of automated steps in CI/CD
   Example: "Our pipeline includes build, test, and deploy stages."
5. Container – A lightweight, portable software package
   Example: "We use Docker containers for app deployment."
6. Orchestration – Managing multiple containers
   Example: "Kubernetes handles orchestration of our microservices."
7. Infrastructure as Code (IaC) – Managing infrastructure using code
   Example: "We use Terraform for IaC to provision servers."
8. Monitoring – Tracking system performance
   Example: "Prometheus helps us monitor our services."
9. Deployment – Releasing software to production
   Example: "We deploy new features every week."
10. Rollback – Reverting to a previous version
    Example: "We had to rollback due to a bug in the latest release."

Task: Write 3 sentences using any of the above terms.

Part 2: Self Introduction Template
"Hi, my name is MUHAMMAD AHMAD. I’m currently working as a Junior DevOps Engineer. I have experience working with tools like Git, Jenkins, Docker, and Kubernetes. I’m passionate about automation and improving deployment processes. My goal is to become a Senior DevOps Engineer and contribute to building scalable and reliable systems."

Task: Write or record your own version of this introduction.

Part 3: Git Command Explanations
git init           – Initialize a new Git repository
git clone <url>    – Clone a repository
git status         – Check status of files
git add .          – Stage all changes
git commit -m ""message""  – Commit changes
git push origin main     – Push to remote repository
git pull           – Pull latest changes
git branch         – List branches
git checkout -b <branch-name>  – Create and switch to a new branch

Task: Write short English explanations for each command.

Part 4: Email Practice
Sample Email:
Subject: Daily Update – DevOps Tasks

Dear Sir,

I hope you are doing well. Today, I worked on configuring Jenkins pipelines and troubleshooting a Docker container issue. I plan to continue testing tomorrow and will update you on the progress.

Best regards,
MUHAMMAD AHMAD

Task: Write a short email to your manager (MUHAMMAD SIDDIQUE) about what you worked on today.
